Ohio State University hired Urban Meyer as its football coach Monday, giving him one of the richest contracts ever in college sports — the latest indication that the big business of college football is undeterred by the nation’s broader economic woes or by concern about the prominence of sports on campus.

The contract includes $4 million in base salary, bonuses — for everything from players’ graduation rates to playing in a national championship, up to $700,000 annually — and lump payments in 2014, 2016 and 2018. The deal is worth more than three times the $1.32 million that the university’s president, E. Gordon Gee, made in 2010, according to The Chronicle of Higher Education.

Mr. Meyer and Ohio State reached the lucrative deal amid a chaotic year in college athletics. The University of Miami was rocked by a report that a donor lavished football players with gifts for years; and longtime assistants for the Penn State football and Syracuse men’s basketball teams are facing allegations that they sexually abused young boys. Several other prominent programs are being investigated by college athletics’ governing body, the N.C.A.A., for myriad violations.

Even the Buckeyes await potential N.C.A.A. sanctions because players traded memorabilia for cash and tattoos, which led to the ouster of Jim Tressel as their coach six months ago.

Still, the college football arms race shows no signs of slowing. To replace Mr. Tressel, Ohio State will invest at least $26.65 million over six years in Mr. Meyer, 47, who won two national championships at Florida. That will include an annual automobile stipend, a golf club membership, 50 hours of private jet use and 12 tickets to each home game.

Continue reading the main story

“It’s symbolic of the condition we’re in,” said William C. Friday, the president of the University of North Carolina system from 1956 to 1986. “There’s an unrestrained salary march, where universities are trying to superimpose an entertainment industry on an academic structure. Any salary in that range is excessive.”

Even Mr. Gee, the university president who hired Mr. Meyer on Monday, has described the system as broken. In an interview with The New York Times in August, he said: “College athletics has gotten beyond itself. Do I think it’s broken? Yes.”
Photo

Urban Meyer was introduced as the Ohio State coach Monday. Credit Jamie Sabau/Getty Images

On Monday, Mr. Gee called Mr. Meyer’s contract “a mark of our dignity and nobility.”

“I’m not certain I’ve ever made as much as a football coach,” Mr. Gee said in a telephone interview. “We live in a world of markets and opportunities. A number of surgeons here make more than I do. I’m about having the best physics faculty, the best medical school faculty and the best football coach.”

Mr. Friday was a co-founder of the Knight Commission on Intercollegiate Athletics. He watched as shoe companies paid large sums to coaches, as broadcast deals boomed. What Mr. Friday called the “invasion of money for commercial television” started about 10 years ago, he said.

Now, by any financial measure, college football has never been more prosperous. Five sports conferences have signed billion-dollar broadcast deals, fueled by the popularity of football.

In the Pacific-12 Conference, where games were once shown on national networks and local channels, officials have decided to create six regional networks instead. The template: the network for the Big Ten Conference, which includes Ohio State. The Big Ten network, according to SNL Kagan, a research firm, earned $227.1 million for the conference in 2010.

Contracts for college football coaches have increased at a similarly rapid pace. If Mr. Meyer reaches his benchmarks for bonuses, he will be among — and may even surpass — the upper echelon of college football coaches: Mack Brown at Texas, Nick Saban at Alabama, Bob Stoops at Oklahoma and Les Miles at Louisiana State.

Mr. Gee said that according to Ohio State’s data on college football coaches’ salaries, Mr. Meyer would rank fourth among his peers, emphasizing that much of Mr. Meyer’s bonuses is tied to academics and his staying at O.S.U. for all six years.

An analysis this month by USA Today found the average salary for a major college head coach jumped nearly 55 percent in the past six seasons, to $1.47 million this year from $950,000 in 2006. This season, according to the analysis, 64 coaches made at least $1 million, with three over $4 million and Mr. Brown of Texas over $5 million, making him the highest-compensated coach.

For David Ridpath, a professor of sports administration at Ohio University and a member of the Drake Group, a network of professors who lobby for academic integrity in college sports, this represents far more than the going rate, which is the typical justification used by universities.
Photo

While winning the B.C.S. national championship game in 2007, Urban Meyer faced Jim Tressel, who stepped down at Ohio State this year. Credit Jed Jacobsohn/Getty Images

“We’ve long gone past anything that’s reasonable,” he said. “If you put too much value on a program, it starts to swallow the university. It starts to guide the moral compass. Soon, a coach is going to make $10 million a year. There’s just no stopping it.”

Early in his career, Mr. Meyer worked as a graduate assistant at Ohio State, starting in 1986. The coach who hired him, Earle Bruce, reportedly earned $87,000 a year. Now, despite the increase, the Buckeyes believe Mr. Meyer is worth every penny of his contract.

His decorated coaching résumé includes a 104-23 record in 10 seasons as the coach at Bowling Green, Utah and Florida. He holds a 7-1 record in bowl games and a 4-0 mark in Bowl Championship Series games.

Citing health concerns, Mr. Meyer said he was retiring from coaching in December 2009. A day later, he said he would continue coaching. After the 2010 season, he again announced his retirement, citing family reasons. He has spent this season as an analyst for ESPN.

A native of Ashtabula, Ohio, Mr. Meyer returns to right the state’s most prominent program. Ohio State, with the 100,000-plus fans who pack its stadium for home games, with college football as its cash machine, sputtered to a 6-6 record this season under the interim coach Luke Fickell and lost to its rival Michigan for the first time since 2003.

At his news conference Monday, Mr. Meyer said he felt “fantastic” and had learned from his time away from coaching.

While Meyer was being hired, several coaches at major programs have been fired in the past few days, including Turner Gill (Kansas), Dennis Erickson (Arizona State), Rick Neuheisel (U.C.L.A.) and Ron Zook (Illinois). Gill is owed roughly $6 million.

“Some schools want to pay their coach more than anybody else,” said Dick Tomey, who made $35,000 in 1977 in his first head-coaching job at Hawaii, where he is now an assistant. “That’s part of it. But that adds to the pressure, which is why you see a lot of guys losing their jobs.”

Correction: November 30, 2011

Because of an editing error, a picture caption on Tuesday with the continuation of an article about Ohio State’s hiring of Urban Meyer as football coach misidentified the game and the year in which Meyer faced Jim Tressel when Meyer coached at Florida and Tressel was at Ohio State. Meyer won the Bowl Championship Series national title game against Ohio State in 2007, not the Fiesta Bowl in 2008. The caption also misidentified the coach Meyer succeeded at Ohio State. It was the interim coach Luke Fickell, who replaced Tressel in May after Tressel resigned in the wake of an N.C.A.A. investigation. Meyer did not succeed Tressel.
